---
title: "On The Irrationality of Apery's Constant"
date: 2024-04-15
permalink: /posts/2025/04/apery/
tags:
  - complex analysis
  - number theory
---

Abstract
-----
I will discuss the bizarre proof that the constant \\( \zeta(3) \\) (known as Apery's constant) is irrational.

Introduction
=====
The Riemann zeta function is the unique analytic continuation of the function \\(\zeta(s) = \sum_\{n \geq 1\} \frac{1}{n^s}\\) (a priori defined only on \\(s \in \mathbb{R} \times i \mathbb{R}_+ \\) ) to the whole complex plane. Naturally, as the subject of the Riemann hypothesis, the zeta function is one of the most well-known functions in mathematics. It turns out that despite extremely being well-studied, we still don't know basic things about \\(\zeta(s) \\). It is not too hard to show that

$$
\begin{align*} 
\zeta( -2k) = 0 & \qquad \forall k \in \mathbb{N},\\
\zeta( -2k + 1 ) \in \mathbb{Q} & \qquad \forall k \in \mathbb{N},\\
\zeta( 2k ) \in \pi^{2k}\mathbb{Q} & \qquad \forall k \in \mathbb{N} \cup \set{ 0 }.
\end{align*}
$$

Hence we know the irrationality of \\(\zeta(k)\\) when \\( k \\) is an integer that isn't odd and positive. One would very much expect from the above that \\( \zeta(2k + 1) \in \pi^{2k+1} \mathbb{Q} \\), but we have no idea. Even worse we have no idea if in general \\( \zeta(2k+1) \in \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q} \\)! It took many years until very recently (in 1978) Apery showed that \\[ \zeta(3) \in \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}. \\]

This proof is quite notable for two main reasons. Firstly the proof uses no "advanced" techniques, and could have been replicated hundreds of years ago by Riemann. Secondly the proof has resisted any and all (to my knowledge) attempts to be adapted for other results.

A Taste of Zeta
=====

We use the following result.

<b>Lemma:</b> <i> Let \\( \alpha \in \mathbb{R} \\). If there exists \\( \delta > 0 \\) and a sequence \\( \alpha \neq \frac{p_n}{q_n} \in \mathbb{Q} \\) with \\( \frac{p_n}{q_n} \to \alpha \\) such that \\[ \left| \alpha - \frac{p_n}{q_n} \right| < \frac{1}{q_n^{1+\delta}} \qquad \forall n > N \\] for some \\( N \in \mathbb{N} \\) then \\( \alpha \in \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q} \\). </i>

We must thus find a sequence \\( \frac{p_n}{q_n} \to \zeta(3) \\) such that the error "shrinks really fast" while the the reciprocal of the denominator "doesn't shrink too fast". What is a good sequence? We first note two identities for \\( \zeta(3) \\):

$$
\begin{align*}
\zeta(3) &= \sum_{i=1}^\infty \frac{1}{i^3},\\
\zeta(3) &= \frac{5}{2} \sum_{j = 1}^\infty \frac{(-1)^{n-1}}{n^3 \binom{2n}{n}}.
\end{align*}
$$

Two natural guesses for good sequences would be the partial sums of these two infinite sums. It turns out that in the first case the error shrinks like \\(n^{-2}\\) and the reciprocal of the denominator shrinks like \\( e^{-n} \\), while in the second case the error shrinks like \\( n^{-3/2}4^{-n} \\) and the reciprocal of the denominator shrinks like \\(e^{-3n}\\). In both these cases the error simply shrinks too slowly to beat the denominator. Apery defined the multivariate sequence \\[ c_{n,m} = \sum_{i=1}^n \frac{1}{i^3} + \sum_{j=1}^m \frac{(-1)^{j-1}}{2 j^3 \binom{n}{j} \binom{n+j}{j}}  \in \mathbb{Q} \\] as something of a "combination" of the first two partial sums. While it is relatively clear that \\( c_{n,k_0} \to \zeta(3) \\) for any fixed \\(k_0\\), it is entirely non-obvious (but miraculously true) that \\[ c_{n,n} \to \zeta(3). \\] One can show that

$$
\begin{align*}
\left| \zeta(3) - c_{n,n} \right|= \sum_{j = n+1}^\infty \frac{(-1)^{n-1}}{n^3 \binom{2n}{n}}.
\end{align*}
$$

This is the same as the tail of the second identity above! This means that \\(c_{n,n} \\)) converges just as quickly as the partial sums (so the error shrinks like \\( n^{-3/2}4^{-n} \\)), but the reciprocal of the denominator now shrinks like \\( (e^3 4)^{-n}\\). This is worse than before, but now we have some leeway and are able to manipulate \\(c_{n,n} \\)) to obtain something that works. The real meat of the proof involves manipulating \\(c_{n,n}\\).

Playing With Your Sequences
=====
Apery, who had likely eaten something vaguely psychadelic that day, decided to tweak \\(c_{n,n}\\) in the following way. Write \\(c_{n,k} = d_{n,k}/ w_{n,k}\\). Then define successively

$$
\begin{align*}
\begin{aligned}
d_{n,k}^{(0)} &= \tbinom{n+k}{k} a_{n,k},\\
d_{n,k}^{(1)} &= d_{n,n-k}^{(0)},\\
d_{n,k}^{(2)} &= \tbinom{n}{k} d_{n,k}^{(1)},\\
d_{n,k}^{(3)} &= \sum_{l = 0}^k \tbinom{k}{l} d_{n,l}^{(2)},\\
d_{n,k}^{(4)} &= \tbinom{n}{k} d_{n,k}^{(3)},\\
d_{n,k}^{(5)} &= \sum_{l=0}^k \tbinom{k}{l} d_{n,l}^{(4)},\\\\
a_n &= d_{n,n}^{(5)}.
\end{aligned}
\end{align*}
\qquad\qquad
asd
$$



References
-----
Almost all of this is derived from Van de Poorten's article on the matter. 

$$
\displaylines{
\nabla \cdot E= \frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0} \\\
\nabla \cdot B=0 \\\
\nabla \times E= -\partial_tB \\\
\nabla \times B  = \mu_0 \left(J + \varepsilon_0 \partial_t E \right)
}
$$
